hey this is presto Walker this problem
was suggested to me by email by
arbitrary Renaissance who also
thoughtfully provided the background to
the problem very often when people
suggest problems to me I reply back and
I asked for the context where was the
problem asked and what tools were
expected to be used to solve the problem
this problem was asked in the fall 2016
online math Olympiad this is a math
contest for high schoolers that's
offered in the fall in the spring teams
of up to four people answer 30 questions
in 11 days only a basic four function
calculator is allowed each question is
worth one point and the average score
for this test was nine so even these
very talented high school students who
took the test were only able to solve on
average about one-third of the questions
now the very top score was 29
which means this person answered almost
all the questions which is truly
incredible because there are fairly
difficult questions I've reworded
problem 16 from the test as follows at
the end of day 0 6 magical seeds are
planted on each day following each seed
has a chance to magically transform into
an apple tree with the probability of
1/2 once a seed transforms into an apple
tree it stays an apple tree and survives
indefinitely what is the expected number
of days until all six seeds have become
apple trees write your answer as a
fraction M over n where m and n are
relatively prime can you figure it out
give this problem a try and when you're
ready keep watching the video for the
solution
so let's get started by translating the
problem into some of the mathematical
details so the first sentence just tells
us that there are six seeds that we need
to consider the next sentence tells us
the transition probability the
probability that each seed turns into a
tree on day I equals one-half the third
sentence tells us just the detail we
need to know for the problem that once a
seed is a tree it stays a tree forever
so we can disregard this sentence we'll
just keep that into account as we do the
calculation finally we need to know the
expected number of days until all six
seeds are trees so we want to figure out
the expectation of the number of days
until we have six trees in this video
I'll present two different solutions
I'll first go over the official solution
which starts from the definition of
expected value then I'll present my own
solution which uses a trick to solve in
simple equations these are formerly
known as Markov chains and recurrence
relations but you don't need to know the
jargon to use this method in fact if
you've been watching my videos you may
already know this method so let's go
through these two different solution
methods the official solution starts out
as follows we'll write n to equal the
number of days until there are six trees
we want to calculate e of n by the
definition of expected value Y of N
equals one times the probability N
equals one plus two times the
probability N equals two plus three
times the probability N equals three and
so on the official solution then has the
very next line you have any equals the
probability that n is greater than or
equal to one plus the probability and is
greater than or equal to two plus the
probability and is greater than or equal
to three and so on
now I've taken several probability
courses and I work on many probability
puzzles but this form the expected value
is not something
Sene but apparently in contest
mathematics it must be very common
because they just went ahead and said
this is the second line of the proof but
where does it come from
so let's derive this luckily arbitrary
Renaissance sent me a more detailed
solution write-up which showed where
this came from and it's actually an
interesting little derivation so the
trick is to rewrite the expectation as
follows let's consider the second term
two times the probability N equals two
we can write this in a stacked form of
two terms of the probability N equals
two the next term three times the
probability N equals three we can write
this in stacked form as three terms of
the probability N equals three
now notice a paddle will continue the
next term will have four terms that are
stacked up the term after that will have
five terms and so on each subsequent
term will have one more stacked term so
now we have the expectation as sort of a
triangular series of summations the very
first summation will be the probability
N equals one plus the probability N
equals two plus the probability N equals
three and so on
and notice this is equal to the
probability n is greater than or equal
to one what's the second line well this
starts out at N equals two so it will be
the probability n is greater than or
equal to two the third line will be the
probability and is greater than or equal
to three and now you'll see where the
pattern comes from so this is why the
expectation of n is equal to the
probability that n is greater than or
equal to one plus the probability n is
greater than or equal to two and so on
so how do we go from here well we need
to figure out each of these terms so
we'll first deduce that the probability
that n is greater than or equal to K
will equal one minus the probability n
is less Knar
to K minus one this is by the compliment
role of probability this is because it
will be easier to deal with the
probability that n is less than or equal
to K minus one this is the probability
that all six seeds become trees by day K
minus one so in order to figure this out
we'll also consider the complement
probability the probability that a seed
is not a tree by day K minus 1 will
equal 1/2 to the power of K minus 1 this
is because on each of the K days there's
a 1/2 chance that the seed does not
transform in the tree on that day so we
need to multiply one-half K minus 1
times therefore the probability of seed
is a tree by day K minus 1 will be the
complement 1 minus this and now we need
to consider 6 different trees so we need
to take this particular probability and
have a product across six different
seeds because each seed turning into a
tree is an independent event so the
probability that all six seeds are trees
by day K minus 1 will be 1 minus 1/2 to
the power of K minus 1 and we want this
entire thing to be raised to the power
of 6 so we now know the probability that
n is less than or equal to K minus 1 and
we need to know 1 minus this so how can
we simplify from here well notice we
have a binomial so we can expand this
using the binomial theorem now you have
to be very careful when doing this so
I'll show you the full derivation of all
the steps
well first use the binomial theorem we
have the binomial coefficient times 1
raised to some power times the other
term negative 1/2 to the power of K
minus 1 raise to 6 minus that power so
the first thing we can do is all of
these powers of 1 1 to any power will be
equal to 1 so these terms will vanish
we can then simplify the binomial
coefficients now we have negative one
half to the power of K minus one being
raised to another power so we can then
simplify this as follows we're gonna
have an alternating sum and the power
it's being raised to can go in the
denominator so this will be the expanded
form of this term and now we need to
take one minus this expanded form so the
very first term is 1 so that will vanish
and then we're taking 1 minus this so
we'll then reverse the signs on each of
the term so we've now figured out the
probability that n is greater than or
equal to K is equal to the following six
terms we can furthermore simplified the
denominators because we can raise 2 to
whatever power was in the denominator so
now how do we figure out the expected
value of n well the expected value of n
is equal to the sum of these
probabilities going from 1 to infinity
now notice each of these terms is a
geometric series that summed from K
going from 1 to infinity so we can sum
each of these six terms independently
and we'll use a formula that the sum of
the geometric series is the first term
divided by the quantity 1 minus the
common ratio so the expected value of n
is the sum across 1 to infinity of the
following six terms where each term is a
geometric series so we can evaluate the
first term using the formula for the sum
of the geometric series and then we can
just do this term by term so you have to
be careful and diligent to just make
sure that you get each of these sums
correctly and finally you now need to
evaluate this sum and you may need to
make sure to get the fraction correct
because you need to leave it as a
fraction where the numerator and
nominator are relatively prime so if you
do that you end up with the answer of
seven eight eighty divided by 1953 and
this is approximately 4.0 three days so
that's the official solution and the
answer so it takes about four days for
all six seeds to become trees so this is
one way to solve the problem I thought
about it in a different way I thought
about it using recurrence relations so I
thought about it as follows let's write
e sub K to be the expected number of
days to get six trees if there are
already K trees but we want to solve is
e sub zero so let's think about it
backwards let's imagine we already have
six trees in that case it's not going to
take us any more days to get to six
trees ecigs
is equal to zero but what if there were
one fewer trees what if there were just
five trees how many days would it take
us to get to six trees well if we have
five trees that means there's one more
seed that needs to transform so after
one day there are two possible things
that could happen to that seed with
probability one-half that last seed
becomes the sixth tree so our waiting
time is then e six and with probability
one-half that seed remains dormant so we
stay at five trees but in that case the
expected waiting time will still be e
five so we can write an equation that be
five is equal to one more day plus the
two possibilities that can happen with
probability of 1/2 we've solved the e
six is equal to zero so we have an
equation that a five is equal to one
plus one-half e five therefore e five is
equal to two so if we have five trees it
takes about two days to get
six trees and that makes sense so now
let's go one more step backwards what is
e for if we have four trees that means
there are two more seeds so after one
day what could happen to those two seeds
well with probability one for both of
the seeds will transform to make six
trees with probability 2/4 exactly one
of the seeds will transform so we have
five trees and then the expected waiting
time will be the expected waiting time
from having five trees 'if I've finally
with probability 1/4 the two seeds will
not transform will stay at four trees
and the expected waiting time will still
be e four so we get the following
equation e four is equal to one more day
plus the following three possibilities
now we substitute in the values for e 6
+ e 5 and then we can solve this
equation for e 4 we get e 4 is equal to
8/3 now we can continue what is e 3 well
if we have three trees that means there
are three more seeds so after one day
there are four possible outcomes it's as
if we are flipping three coins and
counting the number of heads we can have
there have zero heads one heads two
heads or three heads so we end up with a
distribution that's very much like
flipping a coin three times and the
probabilities will be 1/8 3/8 3/8 and 1
eighths either to get to six trees five
trees four trees or three trees so we
can write out the equation for e three
and since we've solved for y 6 e 5 in E
4 we then have an equation that's just
in the one variable III so we can solve
that III is equal to 22 over 7 now from
here we continue
we can figure out eetu because that
means we have two trees which means
there are four more seeds so after one
day we have a distribution of five
possible outcomes as if we were flipping
four coins
and counting the number of heads so I've
written out the details in this
particular video but I'm just going to
skip ahead in the narration we're gonna
end up with the following equation for e
to we can substitute in our values that
we've already solved previously and then
we can get that e 2 is equal to 368 over
105 now we need to continue this until
we get to e 0 so let me just quickly go
ahead to the details of e 1 we end up
with the following equation and we're
gonna substitute in our previous values
and solve that a 1 equals 24 70 over 650
1 so this finally gets us to what we
want which is e 0 so if we have 0 trees
that means we have all six seeds then
after one day we have to consider all
the possible outcomes we can get
anywhere from six trees to staying at 0
trees so we end up with the following
equation we've already solved for all
the previous values so we have only an
equation in easy row which we can then
solve that easy row is equal to 7880
divided by 1953 that's again
approximately 4.0 three days so they're
two different ways of going at this
problem in this solution method you have
the added advantage that you get to
actually figure out the expected number
of days when you have three trees or
four trees so did you figure out this
problem and which method did you use to
figure it out thanks for watching this
video please subscribe to my channel I
make videos on math you can catch me on
my blog mind your decisions if you like
this video you can check out my books
which are linked in the video
description you can also support me on
patreon and you can catch me on social
media either at my
your decisions or at presh tall Walker
depending on the site